# Control through Contact

~

::byline[Joseph Hobbs][April 8, 2026]

I've been thinking a lot about contact and complementarity constraints.  How do we build a solver that can _natively handle implicit contact_ without convergence issues?

## Purpose

In trajectory optimization, contact can either be modeled implicity or explicitly.  Explicit models for contact require _contact mode scheduling_... the solver must know which modes of contact occur and in what order they must occur.  This is rather difficult when you move to highly contact-rich systems.  How could you reasonably schedule contact in a centipede?  It'd be a disaster!

Implicit contact sounds much better, but solvers struggle significantly with implicit contact.  Implicit contact is handled by adding the bilinear constraint \( f_i d_i = 0 \), where \( f_i \) is contact force and \( d_i \) is signed distance to contact.  It is also important to constrain \( f_i, d_i \ge 0 \).  This enforces no penetration, no attraction, and no action at a distance.

The constraints \( f_i, d_i \ge 0 \) are simple to enforce because they are linear inequalities.  The bilinear _equality_ \( f_i d_i = 0 \) is nonconvex and difficult to implement in practice.  As \( f_i \rightarrow 0 \) or as \( d_i \rightarrow 0 \), there's a "sharp corner" in the feasible set, making optimization very difficult.

## Methods

This attempt at control through contact uses __semidefinite relaxations of nonconvex programs__.  For each time step, we define the matrix \( X_i \) according to

\[ X_i := \begin{bmatrix} f_i^2 & f_i d_i \\ f_i d_i & d_i^2 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} f_i \\ d_i \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} f_i & d_i \end{bmatrix} . \]

Here, \( d_i \) is constrained to be a function \( g : \mathbb{R}^n \rightarrow \mathbb{R} \) of the state vector \( x \).  The constraint that \( X_i \) is rank-1 is nonconvex, making global optimization very difficult.  This is often successfully relaxed to

\[ X_i \succeq \begin{bmatrix} f_i \\ d_i \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} f_i & d_i \end{bmatrix} . \]

## Observations

_TODO_

## Interpretations

_TODO_
